---
title: Testing Procedures & Statistics
permalink: /testing-procedures-and-statistics/
variant: tiptap
description: ""
---
<h3><strong>RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES</strong></h3><p></p><h4><strong>ATHLETE</strong></h4><p>As an athlete, you have to know and understand your rights and responsibilities when being tested. Ignorance is not an excuse.</p><p></p><p><strong>ATHLETE RIGHTS</strong> <br>You have the right to:</p><ul data-tight="true" class="tight"><li><p>Have a representative present</p></li><li><p>Have an interpreter, if available</p></li><li><p>Ask for additional information about the sample collection process</p></li><li><p>Request modifications for athletes with disabilities</p></li><li><p>Request a delay in reporting to the doping control station for valid reasons such as:</p></li></ul><p><strong>For In-Competition Testing:</strong></p><ul data-tight="true" class="tight"><li><p>Participate in a victory ceremony</p></li><li><p>Fulfill media commitments</p></li><li><p>Compete in further competitions</p></li><li><p>Perform a warm down</p></li><li><p>Obtain necessary medical treatment</p></li><li><p>Locate a representative and/or interpreter</p></li><li><p>Obtain photo identification</p></li><li><p>Any other exceptional circumstances which may be justified, and which shall be documented</p></li></ul><p></p><p>&nbsp;<strong>For Out-of-Competition Testing:</strong></p><ul data-tight="true" class="tight"><li><p>Locate a representative</p></li><li><p>Complete a training session</p></li><li><p>Obtain necessary medical treatment</p></li><li><p>Obtain photo identification</p></li><li><p>Any other exceptional circumstances which may be justified, and which shall be documented</p></li></ul><p><strong>ATHLETE RESPONSIBILITIES</strong> <br>You have the responsibility to:</p><ul data-tight="true" class="tight"><li><p>Remain within direct observation of the DCO or Chaperone at all times from the point of notification until the completion of the sample collection procedure</p></li><li><p>Provide photo identification</p></li><li><p>Comply with sample collection procedures</p></li><li><p>Report immediately to the Doping Control Station</p></li></ul><p></p><h4><strong>ATHLETE SUPPORT PERSONNEL</strong></h4><p>As an athlete support personnel,&nbsp;you must know and understand your roles and responsibilities when supporting athletes. You play an integral part in shaping good anti-doping behaviours in athletes whom you support.</p><p></p><p><strong>ATHLETE&nbsp;SUPPORT PERSONNEL ROLES</strong></p><ul data-tight="true" class="tight"><li><p>Be knowledgeable of and comply with all anti-doping policies and rules which are applicable to you or the athletes you support</p></li><li><p>Use&nbsp;&nbsp;your influence on athlete values and behaviours to foster anti-doping attitudes</p></li></ul><p><strong>ATHLETE SUPPORT PERSONNEL RESPONSIBLITIES</strong></p><ul data-tight="true" class="tight"><li><p>Cooperate with the athlete testing program and ensure your athlete understand their rights and responsibilities in In-Competition testing and Out-of-Competition testing</p></li><li><p>Disclose to your National Anti-Doping Organization (NADO) and International Federation (IF) whether you have committed an anti-doping rule violation (ADRV) within the past ten years</p></li><li><p>Cooperate with Anti-Doping Organizations (ADOs) in Anti-Doping Rules Violation's investigations</p></li></ul><h3><strong>SAMPLE COLLECTION PROCEDURE</strong></h3><p>The following is a general overview of the doping control process. Departures from these procedures will not invalidate a test result unless it is determined that the integrity of the sample has been compromised.</p><h4><strong>STEP 1: ATHLETE SELECTION:</strong></h4><p>You can be selected for doping control at any time and any place without advance notice and are subject to random and planned selection methods</p><p>(Image for Step 1)</p><h4><strong>STEP 2: NOTIFICATION:</strong></h4><p>A Doping Control Officer (DCO) or Chaperone will notify you of selection for doping control to provide either a urine sample, blood sample or both. You are required to present a photo identification to confirm your identity. The DCO or Chaperone will inform you of your rights and responsibilities. You will be asked to sign the Doping Control Notification form confirming that you have been notified for doping control. A copy of the form will be provided to you for your record. You may also request an athlete representative to accompany you throughout the doping control process</p><p>(Image for Step 2)</p><h4><strong>STEP 3: REPORTING TO THE DOPING CONTROL STATION</strong></h4><p>You are required to report to the doping control station immediately unless you request a delay in reporting for valid reasons. Please visit the <a href="https://www.sportsingapore.gov.sg/anti-doping-singapore/testing/rights-and-responsibilities/" rel="noopener noreferrer nofollow" target="_blank">Rights and Responsibilities</a> section for more information. The DCO or Chaperone will accompany you from the time of notification until the completion of the sample collection process.</p><p>At the doping control station, you will be given a chance to hydrate. Individually sealed beverage will be available.</p><p>(Image for Step 3)</p><h4><strong>STEP 4: SELECTION OF A URINE COLLECTION VESSEL</strong></h4><p>You are given a choice of at least 3 individually sealed sample collection kits, and you will select one. You should verify that the equipment is intact and has not been tampered with. You should maintain control of the collection vessel at all times.</p><p>(Image for Step 4)</p><h4><strong>STEP 5: PROVIDING THE URINE / BLOOD SAMPLE</strong></h4><p>(Image for Step 5)</p><p>Only you and a DCO or Chaperone of the same gender are permitted in the washroom when you provide the urine sample. The first urine sample that you are able to provide following notification must be collected.</p><p>Minors and athletes with a disability must have their representative present. The representative is not permitted to view the sample provision, but to ensure that the DCO or Chaperone is observing the sample provision correctly. The representative will not witness you providing the sample unless you specifically request them or require their assistance.</p><p>Before providing the urine sample, you are required to wash your hands with water, remove any clothing from the knees to the mid-torso and from the hands to the elbows. This provides the DCO or Chaperone with a direct view of the urine leaving your body and into the collection vessel.</p><p>You are responsible for controlling your sample and keeping it in view of the DCO or Chaperone until it is sealed in a sample collection kit.</p><p>If you provide a sample less than the&nbsp;required volume of 90ml, you are required to temporarily seal it and wait until you are ready to provide more urine until the minimum volume is attained.</p><p>(Image for Urine Sample)</p><p><strong>PROVIDING THE BLOOD SAMPLE</strong></p><p>(Image for Blood Sample)</p><p>Prior to providing a blood sample, the Blood Collection Officer (BCO) or DCO must ensure that you have been seated and relaxed for at least 10 minutes. If a blood sample is being collected for the Athlete Biological Passport, you must have been rested for at least 2 hours.</p><p>When providing a blood sample, you will be asked to select from at least 3 sets of blood collection kits, blood sample storage and transportation kits. Checks should be made to ensure they are empty, clean and the seal is intact.</p><p>A trained BCO will perform the blood collection procedure in the presence of a DCO or Chaperone and, if applicable, the athlete representative.</p><p>The BCO shall assess the most suitable vein for sample collection and clean the site. They will then unseal the hypodermic needle and attach the vaccutainers (self-sealing secure containers) and withdraw blood to fill the required number of tubes. No more than 3 attempts will be made per session.</p><h4><strong>STEP 6: SELECTION OF A URINE SAMPLE COLLECTION KIT</strong></h4><p>You are given a choice of at least 3 individually sealed sample collection kits from which to choose one. You should verify that the equipment is intact and has not been tampered with. You will open the kit and confirm that the sample code numbers on the bottles, the lids, and the container all match. Also verify that the bottles are intact and has not been tampered with.</p><p>(Image for Step 6)</p><h4><strong>STEP 7: SPLITTING AND SEALING THE URINE / BLOOD SAMPLE</strong></h4><p>You will split and pour the urine yourself, unless assistance is required and you provide consent for your representative or the DCO to do so on your behalf.</p><p>Pour at least 30ml of urine into the B bottle and pour the remaining urine into the A bottle.</p><p>You will be asked to leave a small amount in the collection vessel so that the DCO can measure the specific gravity. You will then seal the 'A' and 'B' bottles tightly ensuring there is no leakage.</p><p>(Image for Step 7)</p><p><strong>SEALING AND STORING THE BLOOD SAMPLE</strong></p><p>After withdrawing the needle, the BCO or athlete will place one vacctainer into each of the 'A' and 'B' sample bottles. These should be checked for any leakage. The sealed blood sample shall be kept in the Doping Station, at a cool but not freezing temperature, prior to dispatching for analysis.</p><h4><strong>STEP 8: MEASURING SPECIFIC GRAVITY</strong></h4><p>The DCO will check the specific gravity of the residual urine left in the collection vessel to ensure it is suitable for analysis, and will record the value on the Doping Control Test Form.</p><p>If the sample falls outside the required range for specific gravity, the DCO will request additional samples to be provided until one within the required range for Specific Gravity is provided, or until the DCO determines that, due to exceptional circumstances, the session should end.</p><p>You should avoid drinking too much fluid, as it may dilute your urine sample.</p><p>(Image for Step 8)</p><h4><strong>STEP 9: COMPLETING THE DOPING CONTROL FORM</strong></h4><p>You will be asked to provide information on the doping control form about any medication or supplements taken recently. You should also indicate if there is any granted Therapeutic Use Exemption (TUE) for any prohibited substance or methods used.</p><p>You also have the right to note comments on the form regarding the conduct of the doping control session. Be sure to confirm that all of the information is correct, including the sample code number. You will receive a copy of the doping control form. Ensure that the laboratory copy of the form does not contain any information that could identify you.</p><p>The DCO will record the A Sample and B Sample bottle numbers on the Doping Control Form.</p><p>At this point you will be asked to:</p><ul data-tight="true" class="tight"><li><p>Declare any prescription or non-prescription medication, vitamins, food supplements, herbal products and any other substance you have taken within the past 7 days.</p></li><li><p>Declare the use of Beta-2 agonists or non-systemic glucocorticosteroids (intraarticular, periarticular, peritendinous, epidural, intradermal and inhalation) on the Doping Control Form.</p></li><li><p>Provide details of any Therapeutic Use Exemptions (TUE)</p></li><li><p>Include any comments from the procedure on the Doping Control Form.</p></li></ul><p>There is no obligation to make a declaration, but it may be helpful in explaining an adverse analytical or atypical finding.</p><p>Your representative, if present, and you will be invited to check that the information recorded on the Doping Control Form is correct, and to sign it if satisfied.</p><p>The DCO will provide a copy of the Doping Control Test Form to you for your records.</p><p>(Image for Step 9)</p><h4><strong>STEP 10: SECURING AND TRANSPORTING THE SAMPLE</strong></h4><p>Once the samples are placed in a security-sealed transit bag they are sent to a WADA accredited laboratory, by a secure chain of custody, for analysis. This ensures that every step of the process is fully documented and only those authorised to handle the sample do so.</p><p>The copy of the Doping Control Form that the laboratory receives does not contain any information that could identify you.</p><h4><strong>MODIFICATIONS FOR MINORS AND ATHLETES WITH A DISABILITY</strong></h4><p><strong>Minors </strong><br>Minors must be notified of their selection for doping control in the presence of an adult representative (eg, coach, team manager, team doctor, guardian, etc). Under the ADS Anti-Doping Rules, a Minor is any individual below 18 years old. You may be accompanied by your representative at all times during the sample collection procedure, including in the washroom area during sample provision. However, the representative will not witness the passing of the sample. If you decide not to have a representative, the DCO may ask a third party to be present.</p><p><strong>Athletes with a Disability </strong><br>Athletes with a physical disability may ask an adult athlete representative or the DCO to assist when handling the sample collection equipment, splitting the sample, or completing the doping control form. The representative may complete the required sections of the doping control form and sign the form on your behalf if you are unable to do so.</p><p>Athletes with a visual impairment must be accompanied by an adult representative at all times during notification and the sample collection procedure, including in the washroom area during sample provision. However, the representative will not witness the passing of the sample. The representative must read the contents of the doping control form to you, and you may ask your representative to make any comments on the doping control form on your behalf if necessary.</p><p>Athletes with an intellectual disability must be accompanied by an adult athlete representative at all times during notification and the sample collection procedure, including in the washroom area during sample provision. However, the representative will not witness the passing of the sample. The representative may read the contents of the doping control form to you if required.</p><p>Athletes who use condom drainage or indwelling catheter drainage should remove the existing collection bag and drain the system so that a fresh sample can be collected.</p><p>Athletes who self-catheterise may use their own catheter to provide a sample (this catheter should be in a tamper-evident packaging), or use one provided by the DCO if available.</p><h3><strong>TESTING STATISTICS</strong></h3><p>Anti-Doping Singapore (ADS) publishes its doping control statistics annually for the following categories:</p><p></p><p>1. ADS Testing Programme <br>2. Fee-for-Service Testing <br><br>Click on the following links to download our statistics:</p><ul data-tight="true" class="tight"><li><p><a href="https://www.sportsingapore.gov.sg/files/Our%20Work/Anti%20Doping%20Singapore/Testing%20Statistics/FY2010_ADS_Testing_Statistics.pdf" rel="noopener noreferrer nofollow" target="_blank">Financial Year 2010/2011 Doping Control Statistics</a></p></li><li><p><a href="https://www.sportsingapore.gov.sg/files/Our%20Work/Anti%20Doping%20Singapore/Testing%20Statistics/FY2011_ADS_Testing_Statistics.pdf" rel="noopener noreferrer nofollow" target="_blank">Financial Year 2011/2012 Doping Control Statistics</a></p></li><li><p><a href="https://www.sportsingapore.gov.sg/files/Our%20Work/Anti%20Doping%20Singapore/Testing%20Statistics/FY2012_ADS_Testing_Statistics.pdf" rel="noopener noreferrer nofollow" target="_blank">Financial Year 2012/2013 Doping Control Statistics</a></p></li><li><p><a href="https://www.sportsingapore.gov.sg/files/Our%20Work/Anti%20Doping%20Singapore/Testing%20Statistics/FY2013_ADS_Testing_Statistics.pdf" rel="noopener noreferrer nofollow" target="_blank">Financial Year 2013/2014 Doping Control Statistics</a></p></li><li><p><a href="https://www.sportsingapore.gov.sg/files/Our%20Work/Anti%20Doping%20Singapore/Testing%20Statistics/FY2014_ADS_Testing_Statistics.pdf" rel="noopener noreferrer nofollow" target="_blank">Financial Year 2014/2015 Doping Control Statistics</a></p></li><li><p><a href="https://www.sportsingapore.gov.sg/files/Our%20Work/Anti%20Doping%20Singapore/Testing%20Statistics/FY2015_ADS_Testing_Statistics.pdf" rel="noopener noreferrer nofollow" target="_blank">Financial Year 2015/2016 Doping Control Statistics</a></p></li><li><p><a href="https://www.sportsingapore.gov.sg/files/Our%20Work/Anti%20Doping%20Singapore/Testing%20Statistics/FY2016_ADS_Testing_Statistics.pdf" rel="noopener noreferrer nofollow" target="_blank">Financial Year 2016/2017 Doping Control Statistics</a></p></li><li><p><a href="https://www.sportsingapore.gov.sg/files/Our%20Work/Anti%20Doping%20Singapore/Testing%20Statistics/FY2017_ADS_Testing_Statistics.pdf" rel="noopener noreferrer nofollow" target="_blank">Financial Year 2017/2018 Doping Control Statistics</a></p></li><li><p><a href="https://www.sportsingapore.gov.sg/files/Our%20Work/Anti%20Doping%20Singapore/Testing%20Statistics/FY2018_ADS_Testing_Statistics.pdf" rel="noopener noreferrer nofollow" target="_blank">Financial Year 2018/2019 Doping Control Statistics</a></p></li><li><p><a href="https://www.sportsingapore.gov.sg/files/Our%20Work/Anti%20Doping%20Singapore/Testing%20Statistics/FY2019_ADS_Testing_Statistics.pdf" rel="noopener noreferrer nofollow" target="_blank">Financial Year 2019/2020 Doping Control Statistics</a></p></li><li><p><a href="https://www.sportsingapore.gov.sg/files/Our%20Work/Anti%20Doping%20Singapore/Testing%20Statistics/FY2020_ADS_Testing_Statistics.pdf" rel="noopener noreferrer nofollow" target="_blank">Financial Year 2020/2021 Doping Control Statistics</a></p></li><li><p><a href="https://www.sportsingapore.gov.sg/files/Our%20Work/Anti%20Doping%20Singapore/Testing%20Statistics/FY2021_ADS_Testing_Statistics.pdf" rel="noopener noreferrer nofollow" target="_blank">Financial Year 2021/2022 Doping Control Statistics</a></p></li><li><p>[Financial Year 2022/2023 Doping Control Statistics](/files/What%20We%20%20Do/Anti%20Doping%20Singapore/Testing%20Statistics/FY2022_ADS_Testing_Statistics.pdf)</p></li></ul><p></p>